# LDAP notes 2015-10-03

Getting an LDAP server working under FreeBSD or Linux is straightforward:
install the OpenLDAP server package, and you're done. Getting something
interesting in the LDAP server is not as easy, since the default 
configuration is almost invariably one of:
 - no schema defined, so you can't put anything in there, or,
 - the schema is the X.500 people directory, which is boring.
 
These notes describe a setup which puts some machine-descriptive data
in an LDAP server, for the following use-case which is somewhat related
to the kind of configurations Steamworks might do.

The setup for LDAP is based on an [LDAP tutorial][1] at zytrax.com.
The TLS setup is described briefly in [the FreeBSD LDAP documentation][3]
while the CA setup is from [FreeBSD Made Easy][2].

## Scenario

In a local (home) network, IP allocation is usually managed by DHCP.
A machine joins the network and is assigned an address dynamically.
However, some machines may provide services within the house: for
instance, a network-attached printer, or a file-server, or perhaps
an IRC forwarding gateway.

In these situations, it may be useful to configure the DHCP server
to provide a particular MAC address (of the printer, the NAS, or
the Raspberry Pi that does IRC) with a fixed address and hostname.

In addition, DNS may be set up to serve local names with the local
addresses. This provides useful human-readable names inside the
network. For instance

	MAC 00:0a:0a:0a:0a:0a
	Hostname printer
	IPv4 192.168.0.3

This is a simple record, and could easily be looked up in an LDAP
directory as (dc=printer, dc=example, dc=com) (this assumes you name
your local network example.com).

## LDAP Schema

OpenLDAP is shipped with a number of default schemas. Most of them
are experimental. The one called "nis.schema" defines the kind of
attributes we might be interested in, such as macAddress and ipHostNumber.

There are object classes ipHost and ieee802Device which include these
attributes, so one might be tempted to simply use those object classes
in a schema and to try to add entries to the directory. This will fail
because both ipHost and ieee802Device are *auxiliary*.

There is a *structural* objectclass, device, so in order to describe
a regular LAN-attached machine, we need:

	dn: cn=printer, dc=example, dc=com
	objectclass: device
	objectclass: iphost
	objectclass: ieee802device
	cn: printer
	macaddress: 00:0a:0a:0a:0a:0a
	iphostnumber: 192.168.0.3
	description: Laser Printer Upstairs

In order to put this kind of entry into the directory, we need to
tell OpenLDAP that these object classes are in use.

## LDAP Configuration

The object classes we need are in the nis.schema file, which in turn
depends on the cosine.schema file. Add those two schemata (if they are
not already there) to the configuration of OpenLDAP.

In FreeBSD, that means adding these two lines to slapd.conf:

	include /usr/local/etc/openldap/schema/cosine.schema
	include /usr/local/etc/openldap/schema/nis.schema

After that, an LDIF file such as the one above can be added to the
directory, providing host configuration information that can later
be used to setup DHCP and DNS services.

## Test Systems Setup

For testing purposes (also for eventual testing of the crank
and shaft components of the Steamworks system), we use two
separate host systems (jails in FreeBSD work well; VirtualBox
VMs are more difficult to work with because of their networking
setup). We assume working DNS for all of the hosts involved,
and a FQDN for each host.

Note that this setup doesn't address **any** security aspects
of certificates (or securing a local CA root certificate) or
securing the rootdn (superuser) access to the directory.

 - On host A, which will be the certificate authority and act
   as an LDAP client:
   - Create a CA root certificate following [this tutorial][2],
   - Create an LDAP certificate and sign it following [the next tutorial][4].
   - Install the CA root certificate (but not the key!) *also* in the 
     OpenLDAP directory, as `cacert.crt`.
   - In `ldap.conf`, set the CA root certificate as the TLS root.
   - Configure a base (suffix) for searches in `ldap.conf`.
 - On host B, which will be the OpenLDAP server (but can also
   act as a client of itself):
   - Install the CA root certificate as `cacert.crt` in the OpenLDAP directory.
   - Install both the LDAP certificate and key, as `cert.crt` and `cert.key`,
     in the OpenLDAP configuration directory.
   - In `ldap.conf`, set the CA root certificate as the TLS root.
   - In `slapd.conf`, set the CA root certificate as the TLS root.
     Also set the LDAP certificates as the certificates for client
     communications.
   - Configure a base (suffix) for searches in `slapd.conf` and `ldap.conf`.
   - Configure a rootdn (superuse access) in `slapd.conf`.
   - Configure a schema in `slapd.conf` (see previous section).

## Credits

[1] http://www.zytrax.com/books/ldap/ch5/
[2] http://www.freebsdmadeeasy.com/tutorials/freebsd/create-a-ca-with-openssl.php
[3] http://www.freebsd.org/doc/en/articles/ldap-auth/ssl-ca.html
[4] http://www.freebsdmadeeasy.com/tutorials/web-server/apache-ssl-certs.php

