# Development notes dd. 2015-08-26

These notes add implementation details to the specification of
the SteamWorks [Crank](http://steamworks.arpa2.net/spec/crank.html).

The crank is a single daemonized application, written in C, which
provides a FastCGI interface and acts as an LDAP client (with
updates) to the LDAP server to which the crank is bound.

The LDAP server is OpenLDAP. The crank uses the OpenLDAP client-libraries
for connecting to the server.

The FastCGI interface is implemented using the [FastCGI](http://www.fastcgi.com/drupal/node/6?q=node/21) libraries.

Access control is done at the web server / FastCGI client side. 
The crank does not need to do authentication or authorization,
and any request received at the FastCGI interface of the crank
is processed unconditionally.

The crank does need to handle its own authentication to the
LDAP server, since it is an LDAP client.


# FastCGI interfaces

The crank provides the following interfaces (entry points), all of
which use JSON as data-interchange format. Parts after : are quoted
from the crank specification.

 - Structural query: In support of this, the JSON interface has an entrance point for 
   retrieval of structural definitions, unpacked into a JSON-format and 
   keeping all OIDs available. More information can be found in RFC 4512 
   starting from the subschemaSubentry attribute in the directory root.
 - Data query: The same FastCGI interface also permits reading information 
   from the data stored in the Crank's LDAP server, and get it deliverd 
   in a JSON mapping that matches the concepts of LDIF. 
 - Update: The collected changes are submitted, including these preconditions, 
   to Crank which will apply them as a transaction, and report back whether 
   it succeeded or failed, and in case of failure where things went awry.
 - Nagios / status: An interface from Crank to Nagios is desired. ...
   Of course there should also be support for Nagios' assumption of regular 
   uptime checks, both pulling and pushing.


# Questions

 - If access control is done by the surrounding web server, why is
   there access control stored in the crank (and an interface mentioned
   for modifying those access controls)?
 - "Design around Access Control" says that shafts pull from the crank 
   and not from the LDAP server to which the crank is bound. Why? Isn't
   it simpler to connect the shaft to the LDAP server of the crank?
   The shaft specs suggest this as well.
 - SyncRepl is not relevant for the crank, except in the sense that 
   the underlying refreshAndPersist mode can make it easier to stream
   changes to crank clients using server-sent events.
 - SyncRepl is relevant for the shaft (assuming it connects directly
   to the upstream LDAP) so that it gets "transactions" in a clean
   fashion.

